KEP-819: Kubeflow SDK for ML Experience (#823)
kubeflow/community: proposals/819-kubeflow-sdk/README.md

Kubeflow SDK. Unless we update the two control plane components together.
In that case, we can have a single minor version for Kubeflow SDK.

The typical release lifecycle looks as follows:

```
Release Kubeflow Trainer
  -> Bump Kubeflow Trainer in Kubeflow SDK
    -> Release Kubeflow SDK
      -> Update examples if required
```

We can release Kubeflow SDK more frequently than control plane components if we introduce new
features to the client APIs. For that, we can just individually release Kubeflow SDK:

```
Release Kubeflow SDK
  -> Update examples if required
```

Tentatively, we plan to release **two minor versions** of the SDK each quarter.

### Version Control

It is the responsibility of cluster administrators to install the correct version of Kubernetes and
Kubeflow components. Kubeflow community will maintain the compatibility table between
Kubeflow SDK and control plane of Kubeflow components. The following table shows
the tentative versions for Kubeflow Trainer and Kubeflow Optimizer.

| SDK Version | Kubernetes Version | Kubeflow Trainer | Kubeflow Optimizer |
| ----------- | ------------------ | ---------------- | ------------------ |

> | 0.1.0       | 1.29..1.31         | 2.0.0            | None               |

Reviewer: Should we also support `1.32` in SDK Version `0.1.0` since we've already planned to upgrade to 1.32 in: https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer/pull/2448?

Kubeflow Pipelines currently has its own version of client SDK: `kfp`. The long-term goal is to
consolidate Kubeflow Pipelines client APIs into Kubeflow SDK.

Currently, users can leverage `kfp` and `kubeflow` SDKs together to seamlessly build end-to-end
ML pipelines as follows:

```python
from kfp import dsl

@dsl.component
def extract_features() -> dsl.Dataset:
    from kubeflow.spark import SparkClient
    SparkClient.process_data()

@dsl.component
def fine_tune_llm(dataset dsl.Input[dsl.Dataset]) -> dsl.Model:
    from kubeflow.trainer import TrainerClient
    TrainerClient.train()

@dsl.component
def serve(model dsl.Input[dsl.Model]):
    from kubeflow.kserve import KServeClient
    KServeClient.serve()

@dsl.pipeline
def e2e_pipeline():
    extract_features_task = extract_features()
    llm_ft_task = fine_tune_llm(extract_features_task.output)
    serve(llm_ft_task.output)
```

### Build System

Using build systems is critical for enhancing the development and maintenance of the Kubeflow SDK.
It provides dependency management, reproducibility, automation, modularity, etc.

For the Kubeflow SDK, we will use [Hatch](https://hatch.pypa.io/latest/) due to its widespread

> adoption and extensive functionality.

Reviewer: Depends on: https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer/issues/2462

Author: Good point, updated.

consolidate Kubeflow Pipelines client APIs into Kubeflow SDK.

Currently, users can leverage `kfp` and `kubeflow` SDKs together to seamlessly build end-to-end
ML pipelines as follows:

```python
from kfp import dsl

@dsl.component
def extract_features() -> dsl.Dataset:
    from kubeflow.spark import SparkClient
    SparkClient.process_data()

@dsl.component
def fine_tune_llm(dataset dsl.Input[dsl.Dataset]) -> dsl.Model:
    from kubeflow.trainer import TrainerClient
    TrainerClient.train()

@dsl.component
def serve(model dsl.Input[dsl.Model]):
    from kubeflow.kserve import KServeClient
    KServeClient.serve()

@dsl.pipeline
def e2e_pipeline():
    extract_features_task = extract_features()
    llm_ft_task = fine_tune_llm(extract_features_task.output)
    serve(llm_ft_task.output)
```

### Build System

Using build systems is critical for enhancing the development and maintenance of the Kubeflow SDK.
It provides dependency management, reproducibility, automation, modularity, etc.

We are currently evaluating different build systems for the Kubeflow SDK as part of this tracking issue: [kubeflow/trainer#2462](https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer/issues/2462)

> One option we are considering is [`uv`](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv), due to its speed and extensive functionality.

Reviewer 2: I notice that `uv` has provided its own build backend as a separate package `uv_build` recently, as mentioned in astral-sh/uv#3957 and astral-sh/uv#8779. Maybe we can have a try.

> One option we are considering is [`uv`](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv), due to its speed and extensive functionality.

Author: @rudeigerc Do you know is there any advantages to use `uv` as build system instead of hatch ?

### Goals

- Collaborate with ML Experience/IDE Working Group to include this SDK into their charter.

- Introduce initial version of Kubeflow Python SDK that supports Kubeflow Trainer and Kubeflow
  Katib APIs.

  - **Note** that Kubeflow Katib will be probably renamed to Kubeflow Optimizer in the future.
    Thus, in this proposal we will keep the Kubeflow Optimizer name moving forward.

- Reduce duplication across `kubeflow-training` and `kubeflow-katib` SDKs by reusing code assets.

- Design the SDK version control and release schedule.

- Design synchronization scripts between Kubeflow control plane and SDK models.

### No Goals

- Consolidate Kubeflow Pipelines APIs into centralized Kubeflow SDK.

  - As we discussed in the Google document, we want to postpone the `kfp` integration after
    we release the initial version of Kubeflow SDK. The Kubeflow community will work towards
    long-term goal to provide consistent experience for ML Users to interact with Kubeflow APIs.

- Integrate Kubeflow Spark Operator, KServe, Model Registry into Kubeflow SDK.

  - Similar to KFP, we will design the integration between those components in the future releases
    of Kubeflow SDK.

> - Use the Kubeflow SDK to submit Kubernetes CRDs that are not part of Kubeflow projects,

Reviewer 3: It seems here we are saying we are trying to abstract users from kubernetes as well. Can you add more clarifications on this? is it only for CRDs creations?

Reviewer 4: It is as much as possible.

MLEs/Data Scientists shouldn't have to know about kubernetes to use kubeflow.

Author: This No Goal means that we are not planning to utilize this SDK to submit CRDs outside of Kubeflow Projects.
For example, leverage this SDK to create Argo Workflows, RayJobs, or KnativeServing.

Reviewer 5: Actually Argo workflows are not a good example, since they are used by KFP, and  KnativeServing by Kserve.
RayJobs make sense.

# KEP-819: Kubeflow SDK for ML Experience

## Summary

Original Google document: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rX7ELAHRb_lvh0Y7BK1HBYAbA0zi9enB0F_358ZC58w/edit

This KEP outlines a proposal to design Kubeflow SDK that streamlines user experience for
data scientists and ML engineers to interact with various Kubeflow projects

> (Trainer, Katib, Spark Operator, Pipelines, Model Registry, KServe).

Reviewer 4: I see Feast is left out and my guess is that's because of the outstanding question on whether it will be donated to Kubeflow, which is reasonable but still leaves a rather large gap in the product experience.

Reviewer 4: That's fine, that said it doesn't feel like we'll make a quick decision on Feast given the desire to have user interviews/testimonials and I personally think that's for the worse of the community. 

I won't block progress, I'll just be transparent about my opinion.

[this KubeCon + CloudNativeCon talk](https://youtu.be/Lgy4ir1AhYw?t=454).

Currently, Kubeflow's ecosystem lacks simple interfaces for interacting with its components. This
complexity hinders adoption among ML Users, as it requires Kubernetes expertise to use effectively.

This document proposes the Kubeflow Python SDK, designed to streamline the experience of
ML users when interacting with Kubeflow components. In the future, we may extend this SDK to
support additional languages (e.g., Swift, Rust, Java) based on user demand.

### Goals

- Collaborate with ML Experience/IDE Working Group to include this SDK into their charter.

- Introduce initial version of Kubeflow Python SDK that supports Kubeflow Trainer and Kubeflow
  Katib APIs.

  - **Note** that Kubeflow Katib will be probably renamed to Kubeflow Optimizer in the future.
    Thus, in this proposal we will keep the Kubeflow Optimizer name moving forward.

- Reduce duplication across `kubeflow-training` and `kubeflow-katib` SDKs by reusing code assets.

- Design the SDK version control and release schedule.

- Design synchronization scripts between Kubeflow control plane and SDK models.

> 

Reviewer 6: is this then not considering the opportunity of CLI bindings 

```
As a Python-based SDK, adding CLI binding will be trivial, to support “terminal based” use-cases
```

which was discussed per requested [feedback in the doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rX7ELAHRb_lvh0Y7BK1HBYAbA0zi9enB0F_358ZC58w/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.f6k29hmtpp6m) please for my understanding?

Author: I think, the CLI binding is out of scope for now. As I mentioned in the doc, we might have an opportunity to re-use existing CLI tools like `kjob` from Kubernetes Batch WG.
cc @mbobrovskyi @mimowo @mwielgus @tenzen-y @kannon92

Reviewer 7: It could be an initiative for the ML Experience to work on kubectl plugin for kubeflow to submit jobs, retrieve logs? I would say it's less important than the SDK itself.

Reviewer 4: +1 

Can be good follow up work later

Author: I agree, but I would like us to collaborate with Kubernetes Batch WG, so we won't duplicate effort across job submission. cc @ahg-g

### No Goals

- Consolidate Kubeflow Pipelines APIs into centralized Kubeflow SDK.

  - As we discussed in the Google document, we want to postpone the `kfp` integration after
    we release the initial version of Kubeflow SDK. The Kubeflow community will work towards
    long-term goal to provide consistent experience for ML Users to interact with Kubeflow APIs.

> - Integrate Kubeflow Spark Operator, KServe, Model Registry into Kubeflow SDK.

Reviewer 6: if this is about not-integrating installations, controller-handling, etc SGTM, but is this meant to not considering 

```
such as providing a mechanism to load existing clients as “extras” (such as the case for existing clients as MR) and/or Plug-in/Provider mechanism (ie provide a high level interface which existing clients can implement
```

which was discussed per requested [feedback in the doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rX7ELAHRb_lvh0Y7BK1HBYAbA0zi9enB0F_358ZC58w/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.f6k29hmtpp6m) please for my understanding?

Author: Yes, I think we should talk about integration of existing clients into Kubeflow SDK in a followup KEP/discussions.
We should discuss what is the right approach for us to integrate existing client (e.g. model-registry) into Kubeflow SDK.
For example, for `kfp`, we can consolidate client APIs into `PipelinesClient()` as @chensun suggested here: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rX7ELAHRb_lvh0Y7BK1HBYAbA0zi9enB0F_358ZC58w/edit?disco=AAABdUN58Ss

This KEP outlines a proposal to design Kubeflow SDK that streamlines user experience for
data scientists and ML engineers to interact with various Kubeflow projects
(Trainer, Katib, Spark Operator, Pipelines, Model Registry, KServe).

## Motivation

Kubeflow users come from diverse backgrounds, including cluster administrators, data scientists,
and ML engineers (referred to as `ML User` in this proposal). While administrators are familiar
with Kubernetes, ML Users typically are not. They prefer working in a familiar Python environment
with popular data and ML frameworks like PyTorch, TensorFlow, and JAX for ML and Ray, Spark,
Pandas, and Dask for data, while leveraging advanced hardware and cloud infrastructure
to scale their experiments.

Typically, ML Users want to:

- Open JupyterLab.
- Install required AI/ML libraries with `pip`.
- Prototype ML code using PyTorch/TensorFlow APIs.
- Launch jobs to create features from raw data and prepare training datasets.
- Launch jobs to train, fine-tune, and optimize models across many GPUs.
- Collect and analyze results within the same JupyterLab environment.

> 

Reviewer 5: I think the serving part is missing here

One of the typical ML experience workflows can be seen at
[this KubeCon + CloudNativeCon talk](https://youtu.be/Lgy4ir1AhYw?t=454).

Currently, Kubeflow's ecosystem lacks simple interfaces for interacting with its components. This
complexity hinders adoption among ML Users, as it requires Kubernetes expertise to use effectively.

This document proposes the Kubeflow Python SDK, designed to streamline the experience of
ML users when interacting with Kubeflow components. In the future, we may extend this SDK to
support additional languages (e.g., Swift, Rust, Java) based on user demand.

### Goals

> - Collaborate with ML Experience/IDE Working Group to include this SDK into their charter.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Collaborate with the ML Experience/IDE Working Group to include this SDK into its charter.
```
